Good question — this is a real design tension in Lua because the language gives you coroutines but no built-in scheduler, so any SDK has to decide how opinionated to be about concurrency.
Here's the design space, then what I'd actually recommend.
The core idea: coroutine-aware, coroutine-optional
You can absolutely build an API that works naturally in both sync and async contexts without callbacks and without forcing users into coroutines. The trick is that every operation returns a "future-like" handle that is also directly awaitable, and the implementation detects its execution context.-- Sync usage (blocking call, no coroutines anywhere)
local result, err = s3:getObject({ Bucket = "x", Key = "y" })

-- Async usage inside a coroutine
local op = s3:getObject({ Bucket = "x", Key = "y" })
local result, err = op:await()  -- yields if not readyThe same getObject call returns the same object type. What differs is how you consume it.
How the dual mode actually works
The transport layer is the only place that needs to care. You expose two transport implementations behind a common interface:
Blocking transport — uses luasocket or lua-http synchronously. The returned operation is already-resolved by the time the user sees it; await() is a no-op that just unwraps the value, and direct unpacking (local r, e = op) works via __call or just by having getObject return the unwrapped pair when the transport is sync.
Non-blocking transport — uses cqueues, copas, or your own loop. The operation is a pending handle; await() calls coroutine.yield() to hand control back to the scheduler, which resumes when the socket is readable.
The user picks the transport at client construction:local s3 = aws.s3.new({ transport = "blocking" })   -- or "cqueues", "copas", customThis is essentially what Python's httpx does with its sync/async client split, except in Lua you can make the call sites identical because of how flexible coroutines are.
The "coroutines optional" part
The key insight: coroutine.running() tells you whether you're inside one. Your await() can be:function Operation:await()
  if self.resolved then
    return self.value, self.err
  end
  local co, is_main = coroutine.running()
  if is_main or not co then
    -- No coroutine context; run the loop until we resolve
    self.transport:run_until(self)
    return self.value, self.err
  else
    -- Inside a coroutine; yield to the scheduler
    return coroutine.yield(self)
  end
endThis means a user who never thinks about coroutines just writes straight-line code and it blocks. A user who is inside cqueues or copas gets cooperative concurrency from the same code. No callbacks, no async/await keyword coloring problem in the user-facing API.
What I'd avoid
Callback-based APIs as the primary surface. You're right that they suck — they fragment error handling, prevent natural control flow, and compose terribly. If you need them for FFI/C-binding reasons, expose them as a lower layer and build the operation API on top.
Promises as a separate concept. Lua doesn't have the syntactic support to make them ergonomic. A "future that knows how to await itself" is the same idea with less ceremony.
Forcing a specific event loop. Pick a transport interface (something like connect, read, write, close plus a run_until(predicate)) and let users plug in cqueues, copas, or a custom one. AWS SDK for JavaScript made the mistake of being deeply coupled to specific runtimes early on; don't repeat that.
Concrete shape
Roughly:-- Common interface
Operation = {
  await = function(self) ... end,
  cancel = function(self) ... end,
  on_complete = function(self, cb) ... end,  -- escape hatch for callback fans
}

-- Convenience: make `local r, e = client:call(...)` work directly in sync mode
-- by returning unpacked values when transport is blocking, OR always return
-- an Operation and require :await(). Pick one — don't do both, that's confusing.I'd lean toward always return an Operation, always require :await(). It's one extra token at every call site but the consistency is worth it. It also makes things like await_all({op1, op2, op3}) natural for parallelism, which is one of the main reasons to want async at all.
Given your Smithy background, the code generator angle is interesting here: you can generate the typed operation classes once and have them inherit the await/cancel machinery from a base, so the per-operation generated code stays tiny.
Want me to sketch the transport interface in more detail, or talk through how this interacts with retries and pagination (both of which want to be transparent to the await/sync distinction)?